New `www` page to explain mocking (#4017)
trpc/trpc: www/docs/reactjs/mocking.md

---
id: Mocking
title: Mocking your server
sidebar_label: Mocking your server

> slug: /mocking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
slug: /reactjs/mocking
```

---

Mocking tRPC gives you the ability to isolate your frontend components into testing or presentation environments without having to alter how they behave.

By intercepting our tRPC calls at the [Service Worker level](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Service_Worker_API) and returning responses as the component expects, mocking can help you to:

- Write performant, easy-to-execute tests that don't rely on changing the underlying component in any way

> Present components in frontend workshops like Storybook exactly as they would appear and behave in your main app

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Present components in frontend workshops like Storybook exactly as they would appear and behave in your main app
```

### 1. Initialize a new React hook

Create a new file for your `MockedTRPCProvider` and import your `AppRouter` type from where your standard tRPC router is defined. This will ensure that your mocks have the same type signature as your API.

```ts title='mockedTRPCProvider.ts'
import type { AppRouter } from "../path/to/server/trpc";
```

Next, create a set of React hooks from your `AppRouter` type signature with `createTRPCReact`.

```ts title='mockedTRPCProvider.ts'
const mockedTRPC = createTRPCReact<AppRouter>({
  unstable_overrides: {
    useMutation: {
      async onSuccess(opts) {
        await opts.originalFn();
        await opts.queryClient.invalidateQueries();
      },
    },
  },
});
```

### 2. Create your mocked tRPC provider

Now we just need to create a wrapper that exposes the client. This process is similar to [the React setup](https://trpc.io/docs/react#3-add-trpc-providers) however we don't need to utilize the `useState` hook because our tests are not using SSR.

```ts title='mockedTRPCProvider.ts'
// @ts-expect-error tRPC utilizes global fetch
global.fetch = fetch;

const mockedTRPCClient = mockedTRPC.createClient({

>   links: [httpBatchLink({ url: "http://localhost:3000/api/trpc" })],

Reviewer 2: `createClient` can't be called without providing a transformer

>   links: [httpBatchLink({ url: "http://localhost:3000/api/trpc" })],

Reviewer 2: `createClient` also needs to be passed a transformer
(note: this is also missing in trpc/react-query docs pages. maybe a recent type change?)

Reviewer 3: Since transformer is optional, isn't it best to keep the docs boiled down to their simplest example? I think that's been the way so far in the docs and reduces visual noise for new learners

Reviewer 2: as far as i can tell its not possible to not pass a transformer here 
<img width="689" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8353666/226212852-620ff55d-0b53-4d52-8c42-bfc136715662.png">

slug: /reactjs/mocking
---

Mocking tRPC gives you the ability to isolate your frontend components into testing or presentation environments without having to alter how they behave.

By intercepting our tRPC calls at the [Service Worker level](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Service_Worker_API) and returning responses as the component expects, mocking can help you to:

- Write performant, easy-to-execute tests that don't rely on changing the underlying component in any way
- Present components in frontend workshops like Storybook exactly as they would appear and behave in your main app

The examples below use [Vitest](https://vitest.dev/), [React Testing Library](https://github.com/testing-library/react-testing-library), and [Mock Service Worker](https://www.npmjs.com/package/msw-trpc) (MSW), but the concepts apply to any testing framework.

## Creating a MockedTRPCProvider

For tRPC's hooks to work, they require [context](https://trpc.io/docs/context) that describes the URL of the backend and the structure of the API.

- In React, you achieve this by wrapping your component tree with the `trpc.Provider` and `QueryClientProvider` components.

> - In Next.js, this step is abstracted in `_app.ts` by using `trpc.withTRPC(MyApp)`.

Reviewer: _app.tsx

  return (
    <StyledCatText>{data.bestCat}</StyledCatText>
  )
}
```

</details>

Finally, we want to verify that our component is working as we anticipated, so we write a test.

```ts title='component/cats/BestCat.spec.tsx'
describe("BestCat", () => {
  const server = setupServer(
    trpcMsw.cats.bestCat.query((req, res, ctx) => {
      const input = req.getInput()
      // 🚨 You can console.log here to view your request being captured
      return res(
        ctx.status(200),
        ctx.data({
          bestCat: `Hey ${input.name}! The best cat is Mozzie!`,
        })
      );
    })
  );
  
  beforeAll(() => server.listen());
  afterAll(() => server.close());
  
  test("should render the result of our query", async () => {
    renderWithProviders(<BestCat />);
    expect(screen.getByText(/Data unavaliable/i)).toBeVisible();
    await waitFor(() => {
      const worldsBestCat = screen.getByText(/Mozzie/i);
      expect(worldsBestCat).toBeVisible();
    });
  });
});
```

Let's break our test down a little to understand what's going on. We'll start by looking at what our `test` block is doing, and then return to our `server` setup and teardown.

> The very first thing we do is make sure that our client (`trpc`) has access to its context (`MockedTRPCProvider`). Happily, we've made this easy to do by utilizing our new `renderWithProviders` function. After that, we are correctly anticipating that when we first render the component, we need to asynchronously wait for the data to load before we can assert on the anticipated response.

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like

```suggestion
First we render our `<BestCat />` component with the necessary context using the `renderWithProviders` function that we created earlier. Then we assert that the component will start out in loading state, as it needs to asynchronously wait for the data to load. Once we have waited for the data to load, we assert on the anticipated response.
```
?

> The component is now successfully making calls from its client when we run the test, however, we now need to intercept those calls and mock a response. This is where our `server` comes in. Inside of `setupServer`, we can define the requests that our `Cat` component uses so we can intercept them and return a mocked response. Because `trpcMsw` uses the shape of our `AppRouter`, we can use our existing typing to quickly define the request handler we need.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The component is now successfully making calls from its tRPC client when being tested. But we don't want it to make those calls to a real server. This is where our mocked `server` comes in. Inside of `setupServer`, we can define the requests that our `Cat` component uses so we can intercept them and return a mocked response. Because `trpcMsw` uses the shape of our `AppRouter`, we can use our existing typing to quickly define the request handler we need.
```

With our server listening, our component's network call is now being intercepted at the lowest possible network level, simulated by MSW, and a response is being sent back in exactly the way our React component expects. Critically, we didn't need to mock or adapt any of the component's standard behaviors to isolate it. We should now receive:

```
PASS component/cats/BestCat.spec.tsx
  BestCat
    should render the result of our query ✓
```

## Further reference

> 

Reviewer 2: Add a link to a working repo here? The one I posted yesterday would work, but even better would be one with dependabot, a ci pipeline, etc so it stays up to date. Could even add this to `/examples`
